Using the photo of the Grand Canyon, what geologic principle tells you that the layer labelled A is older than layer B?
Can you determine the exact age of layer A or layer B?
Notice the red line on the photo. The beds under the line are tilted. Were they deposited as tilted beds?
Notice the blue arrows. We can assume that since these beds look similar and they have the same strata above and below them, that they were deposited in the same event. We can make this assumption based on the principle of _______.
Which is oldest formation? What is the geologic principle?
Which is the youngest formation?
Which is older, M or L? Principle?
Is intrusion T younger or older than Layer P? Name 2 principles.
Is intrusion T younger or older than Layer A? Principle?
Did intrusion D older or younger than layer A? Name 2 principles.
Is intrusion T younger or older than intrusion D? Name 2 principles.
Intrusion T has inclusions of A. This means that A is older than T because of which principle?
Which erosional surface occurred first, Z, Y or X?
When did the tilting occur, before or after deposition of E? Principle?
Is the channel that is cut into layer S older or younger than S? Principle?
Is the erosional layer Y older or younger than intrusion D? Principle?
Is there any place on earth that has a complete series of rock strata?
Why do we correlate rock strata?
What type of rock characteristics are used in correlation?
What 3 requirements are needed for a fossil to be considered an index (or guide) fossil?
Why can you correlate multiple outcrops that are not connected physically?
In the figure to the right, which fossil makes the best index fossil?
Correlated the 3 sections, drawing lines from each layer to the matching later.
How do unconformities occur?
What are the 3 types of unconformities?
Which type of unconformity requires the presence of igneous or metamorphic rock?
What type of unconformity is shown in Picture A? Picture B?
Fill in the blanks on the chart using the word bank:
What is an isotope?
What is an unstable isotope?
What is radioactive decay?
What is the decay product of a parent isotope called?
What is a half-life?
After 1 ½ life, how much parent isotope is present?
If ½ of the parent decays, how much of the total is daughter isotope?
Is the ½ life of all isotopes of different elements the same?
What is carbon dating?
Can all rocks be used for radiometric dating?
What is meant by “closure temperature”?
If the top layer contains 25% parent, how much daughter is present?
If the top layer contains 25% parent, how many ½ lives have passed?
The top layer of volcanic ash is dated at 495 mya. If it contains 50% parent, what is the ½ - life?
The top layer of volcanic ash is dated at 495 mya and the second layer is dated at 510 mya. How old is the fossil Pecten located between the layers?
If the 3rd layer of volcanic ash contains 75% parent, how much daughter is present?
If the 3rd layer of volcanic ash contains 75% parent, how many ½-lives have passed?
The 3rd layer of volcanic ash is dated at 520 mya. If it contains 50% parent, what is the ½ - life?
The 3rd layer of volcanic ash is dated at 520 mya and the second layer is dated at 545 mya. How old is the fossil Trilobite located between the layers?
The 4th layer of volcanic ash contains 12.5% parent, how many ½-lives have passed?
If the 4th layer of volcanic ash contains 12.5% parent, how much daughter is present?
When does the Precambrian Eon begin?
What eon are we in today?
What era are we in today?
What period are we in today?
What epoch are we in today?
